The welfare state, the glue that binds the social fabric of the world's advanced capitalist economies, is coming unstuck.
The immediate cause is its increasing cost at a time when budget deficits burden most of the 24 member states of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Rising welfare spending has been a significant factor in the average increase in net state borrowing of 3 percentage points of GDP across the OECD between 1989 and 1992.
In the longer term, there are fears that the cost of the welfare state could become insupportable as populations age over the next 50 years.
While short-term measures may ease the immediate budgetary pressures, more fundamental reforms will be needed if the welfare state is not to undermine the economic performance that has underpinned its enormous expansion since the second world war.
Total government spending in the OECD countries has risen from 28.1 per cent of GDP in 1960 to 43.8 per cent in 1990.
The biggest element in this growth has been the cost of pensions, healthcare, unemployment benefits and family support.
Social security payments more than doubled during this period, from 7 per cent of GDP to 15.4 per cent.
Expenditure has risen rapidly in recent decades, more than doubling its average share of GDP in OECD countries since 1960.
The growth is largely attributable to three factors: The increase in coverage as pension schemes introduced after the second world war mature.
Countries such as Spain, Ireland and the Netherlands have been extending their public healthcare systems to provide universal coverage.
As with pensions, health systems have become more generous in the wake of economic growth - for example, including grafts and transplants that were previously regarded as experimental.
But what most concerns those responsible for public finances is the strength of underlying pressures on welfare spending that will push costs upwards in the future.
Germany and Japan, for example, will both have age dependency ratios of 34 per cent by 2020 - one person over the age of 65 for every three people between 15 and 64.
Age dependency ratios will climb more slowly in the UK and US, to about 25 per cent in 2020 - four people of working age to support every elderly person.
Real economic growth rates of up to 1.5 per cent a year would be needed to pay for pensions alone - and that on the assumption that the pensions do not increase in real terms.
Other changes in social structure are also pushing up the demands on the welfare state.
This ratchet effect has worried the Group of Seven leading industrial countries sufficiently for an employment summit to be hosted by President Clinton in the coming months.
Average government debt in OECD countries has risen from 23 per cent of GDP in 1979 to 44 per cent in 1992.
