SLOVENES always had at least as much in common with their Alpine neighbours as with their Balkan partners in the former Yugoslavia.
Since Slovenia's declaration of independence in June 1991, the gap between the peaceful, ethnically homogeneous new republic of 2m people and the war-impoverished rest of former Yugoslavia has widened inexorably. '
We have been very lucky,' says President Milan Kucan, the wily former communist who led Slovenia's drive for independence from the Serb- dominated federation.
But he, like Mr Janez Drnovsek, the prime minister of Slovenia's three-pronged coalition government, makes clear that Slovenia suffers economically from the disintegration of Yugoslavia and would be one of the principal gainers from a resolution of the bloody Balkan imbroglio. '
Slovenia's southern border with Croatia has become the border between peace and war in Europe,' Mr Kucan declares.
At its narrowest point, only a 46 km- long strip of Slovenian coast- line separates Italy from the rest of former Yugoslavia.
Austria is insulated from the war-torn regions of Croatia and Bosnia-Herzegovina, both once ruled by the Austrian Habs- burgs, thanks to its own 324 km-long border with Slovenia.
The new Karavanke road tunnel beneath the Alps, completed just before the 10-day war between Slovenia and the Yugoslav army which immediately followed indep- endence, has underlined Slovenia's traditional importance as a transit route.
The railways and the motorway leading south through the capital Ljubljana to the Slovenian port of Koper and its Italian neighbour Trieste carry freight and travellers heading to and from central Europe and the Adriatic sea.
Independence has, above all, brought peace to Slovenia and left it free to implement the kind of rational market reforms and privatisation policies which remain blocked in the republics absorbed and impoverished by war further south.
Its per capita GDP of around Dollars 6,000 was three times higher than that of Serbia and five times that of Kosovo, the poorest region of the former Yugoslavia.
