The Reagan administration moved to deal with the worsening drought, and a top trade official said that farm export subsidies may have to be curbed.
Meanwhile, fears mounted that the fragile recovery of agriculture-related industries will be derailed by continuing lack of rain.
Concern that the drought could fuel inflation drove stocks and bonds sharply lower yesterday.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 37.16 points to close at 2094.24, while U.S. government bonds fell more than 1 1/2 points.
Grain and soybean futures continued their drought-driven rally.
President Reagan appointed an interagency group to deal with the drought and Agriculture Secretary Richard Lyng authorized farmers in drought parched counties in 13 states to harvest hay on idled crop land in the government's Conservation Reserve Program.
While he wouldn't predict what kind of disaster relief might be authorized, Mr. Fitzwater said the drought "certainly is going to drive up food prices.
At a news briefing, Special Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter warned that the administration may have to curb its so-called export enhancement program if the drought becomes even worse.
This program is designed to boost farm exports by reimbursing U.S. exporters for the difference between the prices they receive for grain and other commodities in world markets and higher U.S. prices.
But Mr. Yeutter said he would "vigorously" oppose any embargo on U.S. soybean exports.
Before the drought began damaging crops this month, the year was shaping up as one of the best in the decade for rural industries that depend on farmers.
"Everybody is watching the dollars they have," says Allen Olson, a vice president of the National Bank of Harvey, N.D., where the drought has already halved the potential yield of the local wheat crop.
"It's already getting harder to sell farmers tractors because of the drought," says James K. Ashford, Case president and chief executive officer.
"Before the drought we expected a very solid year" for farm lenders, says Mark Drabenstott, an economist at the Kansas City Federal Reserve Bank.
