World Bank President Barber Conable was so well regarded during his 20-year career as a Republican congressman from New York that some journalists nicknamed him "H.R." -- for "highly respected."
And to many on Capitol Hill, Mr. Conable still is.
Rep. Tom Foley, a liberal Democrat from Washington State, calls him "a very strong asset" to the 151-nation institution "because of the enormous respect he has on both sides of the aisle."
After a year and a half in office, he has failed to move the bank into a leadership role on the Third World debt problem.
"The World Bank has been reluctant to step out on this issue in confrontation and conflict with the Treasury," charges Sen. Bill Bradley, a New Jersey Democrat and Congress's leading voice on the debt problem.
Rep. John LaFalce, a New York Democrat and another leader on the issue, agrees.
While the debt morass has deepened, Mr. Conable's World Bank has looked inward, shuffling its organization charts around in a disruptive reorganization and then campaigning for a $74.8 billion increase in its capital.
The deletion was made pending action by a committee looking into the bank's approach to the debt crisis.
He has clung to the bank's traditional role of a conventional lender and adviser to developing nations and has deferred on ideas about the debt to the man who picked him for his job -- U.S. Treasury Secretary James Baker.
Mr. Conable subscribes to the "Baker Plan," which stresses new lending by commercial banks and the World Bank to debtor countries that adopt growth-oriented, market-based economic reforms.
Even the World Bank's longtime financial wizard, Eugene Rotberg -- who quit the bank for Merrill Lynch over Mr. Conable's reorganization plan -- proposed last month that the World Bank guarantee new 20-year commercial-bank loans to Third World countries.
Defending his approach to the debt problem, Mr. Conable explains: "We aren't a financial institution but a development institution.
While financial experts often urge the bank to do more, the ponderous institution has intervened only about half a dozen times in debt crises, usually just to guarantee a small portion of a commercial-bank loan package.
Recently, commercial-bank lenders to Brazil tried to get the World Bank to insure a portion of a big new loan package they were negotiating.
Yet even inside the bank, there is increasing worry that the Third World debt -- totaling $1.19 trillion last year -- frustrates the bank's goals.
"Baker's approach has to be adapted to the circumstances of today," says the bank's No. 2 man, Operations Vice President Moeen Qureshi.
Partly in response to the external and internal pressures, Mr. Conable sent a debt study to his board early in April.
But conspicuously absent from the report, which discussed debt-relief proposals from Secretary Baker, Sen. Bradley and others, were any ideas from the bank itself.
Rep. Joseph Kennedy III, a Massachusetts Democrat, charges that "the World Bank is just laundering funds that go back to the banks."
