To economists, term limits sound like minimum wages, rent controls and similar interferences with free markets.
In each case, the government tries to prevent a mutually advantageous trade: an employer hiring a low-productivity, hence, low-wage worker who is willing to work at that wage; a renter inducing an increase in the supply of housing by willingly paying a higher price; and an electorate choosing a desired representative who is willing to serve.
The real surprise is that some strong supporters of free markets, such as The Wall Street Journal, have been the biggest advocates of term limits.
One argument is that incumbent politicians have unfair advantages in elections because of their ready access to campaign funds, staff, mailing and travel privileges, media publicity, and so on.
Hence, the electorate is fooled systematically into supporting incumbents even when they are inferior to their challengers.
This argument is similar to the Galbraith-like view that big corporations with massive advertising budgets can consistently dupe their customers into buying inferior products.
Another argument is that a citizen Congress with its continuing flow of fresh faces into Washington would result in better government than that provided by representatives with lengthy tenure.
Much has been made of Alexander Hamilton's reflections on this point in Federalist 72: "One ill effect of the exclusion {from re-election} would be a diminution of the inducements to good behavior."
(It is interesting to note, however, that Hamilton was not discussing term limits on the legislature, and was actually arguing against the term limits on the chief executive that are contained now in the 22nd Amendment.)
Although the chances of success seem small, one way to proceed would be to call the proposal the Civil Rights Amendment -- recent experience shows that calling something a Civil Rights Act helps to get it passed.
The 22nd Amendment reflected Congress's desire to shift the balance of power away from the executive, and notably the desire of a Republican-dominated House and Senate to prevent the rise of another powerful Democratic president like Franklin Roosevelt.
