Millions of gallons of crude oil that spilled when a tanker ran aground spread across a wildlife-rich stretch of ocean Saturday, and Alaska's chief environmental officer criticized cleanup efforts as too slow.
The biggest oil spill in U.S. history created a slick about seven miles long and seven miles wide in Prince William Sound.
The Coast Guard said only Reef Island and the western edge of Bligh Island had been touched by the slick.
``This situation, I think, was everyone's secret nightmare about what could happen with oil traffic in the sound,'' said Dennis Kelso, commissioner of the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation.
Some 240,000 barrels _ about 10,080,000 gallons _ of crude oil from Alaska's North Slope spilled early Friday when the 987-foot tanker Exxon Valdez ran hard aground on Bligh Reef, about 25 miles outside Valdez, where it had taken on a total cargo of 1.2 million barrels.
``What we have here is a major environmental catastrophe,'' said one oil spill expert, Richard Golob of Boston, publisher of Golob Oil Pollution Bulletin.
Divers Saturday said they had found six to eight holes in the vessel's hull large enough to swim through, said Frank Iarossi, president of Exxon Shipping Co. About 30 feet of the vessel is resting on a shelf on the reef.
Efforts to begin pumping 200,000 gallons of oil off the Exxon Valdez onto another tanker, the Exxon Baton Rouge, were halted early Saturday when authorities noticed that oil appeared to leaking as the pumping operation proceeded.
Wieliczkiewicz said a boom was placed around the Exxon Valdez and the Exxon Baton Rouge to help contain oil around the vessels.
He also said four members of the Coast Guard's Pacific Strike Team from San Francisco, specially trained to deal with pollution and oil spills, arrived Saturday and were helping to rig pumps and assemble equipment needed to transfer oil to the Baton Rouge.
Previously, the largest U.S. tanker spill was the Dec. 15, 1976, grounding of the Argo Merchant tanker off the Nantucket shoals off Massachusetts, in which 7.6 million gallons of oil spilled, Golob said.
