A controversial videotape being shown among activists nationwide shows Los Angeles police officers intentionally hurting the nonviolent demonstrators they are arresting.
They press fingers under their noses.
They dig their knuckles into protesters' necks, and torque martial arts weapons around their wrists.
At one point, two officers twist a woman's arm till she rises from the ground, her face wrenched in agony.
In another scene, a young man winces as officers lead him along.
His arm, contorted behind his back, finally snaps.
Police departments nationwide say it's a tried and true way to make uncooperative protesters cooperate.
Demonstrators have alleged police brutality at least since Freedom Riders launched their sit-down strikes in Alabama almost 30 years ago.
This time, however, the outcry -- including the videotapes of police in action -- comes from anti-abortion protesters with Operation Rescue, whose members tend to see themselves as law-and-order conservatives.
Suddenly, some pro-choice liberals are as supportive of the police as conservative hawks
were during 1960s demonstrations, while some anti-abortion Republicans are voicing the sort of "police state" rhetoric once associated with anti-war radicals.
Meanwhile, police officers, many of whom are sympathetic to the anti-abortion cause, claim that religious zeal --
and perhaps the use of muscle relaxants -- has given Operation Rescue anti-abortion protesters an unusually high tolerance to pain -- or even a martyr's appetite for it.
"I think it's utter stupidity," Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl F. Gates said.
In reaction to the uproar, the LAPD is quickly phasing out the term pain-compliance, but not the techniques, which have been used "in civil rights demonstrations, student demonstrations, Vietnam demonstrations . . .
Demonstrated on recruits who had seated themselves like protesters on the Academy's playing field, each of these techniques worked promptly.
They become "human worm-balls" and make themselves tense, rendering standard compliance techniques ineffective, officers say.
Nichols is puzzled by those who call pain-compliance excessive force, or compare it to the cattle prods police use in South Africa.
Police actually plead with Operation Rescue demonstrators in some cases, he said.
As a result, they have filed lawsuits against police in Los Angeles, Sacramento, Atlanta and other cities.
Nichols and others have alleged that some demonstrators simply take muscle relaxants to increase their tolerance -- a charge an Operation Rescue spokeswoman called "100% incorrect."
As Operation Rescue built momentum, engaging in civil disobedience at clinics around the country, the allegations of police brutality increased:
A woman arrested this year in Los Angeles said: "By the time they got my arms all the way back the pain was so intense
