A French DC-10 jetliner with 171 people aboard experienced a powerful high-altitude explosion, possibly from a terrorist bomb, before crashing in a remote desert region of Niger in northern Africa, officials in France said Wednesday.
In Washington, intelligence specialists said they believe that the jetliner may have been bombed by people seeking to retaliate against France for its recent actions in Lebanon.
For several months, France has played an active part in the Lebanon crisis, attempting to broker a settlement between Christian and pro-Syrian forces.
Late last month, the French government sent a naval task force of five warships into Lebanese waters as part of what President Francois Mitterrand called a "rescue mission" for several thousand French nationals living in the war-torn country.
Gen. Michel Aoun and his Maronite Christian forces against Syrian troops and Muslim militias in Lebanon.
Ever since, one intelligence official said Wednesday, the French government has realized that its planes were being targeted for some sort of terrorist attack.
The DC-10 operated by the French airline UTA crashed Tuesday after taking off from N'Djamena, Chad, on a flight that originated in Brazzaville, Congo.
French military helicopter crews who visited the crash site in the desolate reaches of the Sahara Desert late Wednesday afternoon found no survivors.
On Wednesday, Michel Friess, a spokesman for UTA, said that "the wide surface over which the debris of the airplane has been found suggests a high-altitude explosion that leads one to think of a criminal attack."
The London caller linked the attack to the seizure of a Shiite cleric, Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid, by Israeli forces in southern Lebanon on July 28.
The sudden loss of contact was another explanation given by the French airline authorities supporting the theory of a terrorist explosion.
An Air France flight on Aug. 28 was delayed for more than five hours before taking off from Dulles International Airport in Washington when security officials received a last-minute bomb threat.
