This nation's volatile election was postponed today as the country was plunged into shock and turmoil after Tuesday's assassination of former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi.
Gandhi, 46, a member of a family dynasty that led India for three generations, died after a powerful bomb detonated near a campaign platform in Sriperumbudur, about 30 miles from Madras, the capital of Tamil Nadu.
India's military and paramilitary forces were put on "red alert" as gangs took to the streets of New Delhi and other cities, looking for scapegoats.
India's chief election commissioner, T.N. Seshan, early this morning postponed the remaining two phases of the national parliamentary elections until next month.
He acted after consulting the president and the acting prime minister.
The first phase of the elections took place Monday, but voting for the remaining 60 percent of the 537 seats at stake will be June 12 and 15 instead of Thursday and Sunday.
Eyewitnesses at the assassination scene said Gandhi's body was ripped apart and decapitated by the force of the explosion.
Officials in New Delhi said the blast was caused by either a time bomb or remote-control device.
A Congress Party spokesman said the bomb was hidden in a bouquet of flowers offered to Gandhi as he approached the dais for his speech.
There was no immediate indication who was responsible for the bomb, but speculation centered on Tamil separatists seeking an independent state in nearby Sri Lanka.
Analysts here said there is no obvious successor to him as leader of the Congress Party, which was founded by his grandfather, Jawaharlal Nehru, India's first prime minister, and later dominated by his mother, Indira Gandhi, who was prime minister when she was assassinated in 1984.
Outside Gandhi's house in New Delhi on Tuesday night, hundreds of angry Congress Party workers chanted slogans against the CIA, accusing the U.S. intelligence agency of engineering the assassination.
People broke into the house of Gandhi's neighbor, former Labor Minister Ram Vilas Paswan, and set furniture ablaze, police said.
Gandhi and his Congress Party have many enemies on the subcontinent, including violent separatists in Kashmir and Punjab, leftist revolutionaries and rightist Hindu militants.
Gandhi, whose Congress Party provided the main backing to the New Delhi government at the time, was widely seen as being behind the dismissal, which angered the Tamil Tigers and their supporters in southern India.
: The party was formed in November with Congress Party backing by current prime minister Chandra Shekhar, who heads interim government.
