Wearing a bright yellow flame-retardant shirt, Donald Despain crouches down to study the ash-covered forest floor.
The scorched hillside around him appears utterly lifeless.
Almost everything in sight is black, from the tips of trees 40 feet above the ground to the powdered ash blanketing the earth.
The firestorm that raged through here in recent weeks was driven by 60-mile-an-hour winds that fanned temperatures to more than 1,600 degrees Fahrenheit.
The fire was so intense that a gray shadow on the forest floor is all that remains of a fallen log.
Where many people recoil at the sweep of nature's destructive power, the 47-year-old Mr. Despain marvels at the tiny steps life is already taking to renew itself.
As Yellowstone National Park's research biologist, he has already begun to monitor the forest's rebirth from the worst fire on record.
The tiny seeds are slowly released from rock-hard pine cones only after the cones have been seared by the passing flames; indeed, they require a fire to propagate themselves.
"This is amazing," says Mr. Despain, reflecting on his count.
Only about 500 mature trees were on an acre of hillside here before the fire.
But next spring many of the seeds, fertilized by nutrients leaching into the soil from the snow-packed ash, will sprout, along with a bouquet of grasses, flowers and shrubs, as burnt areas of the park erupt with life.
The profusion of pine seeds is just one of the rejuvenating forces at work in Yellowstone even as the fires, largely quenched this week by rain and snow, still smolder.
Next year, the ground cover replacing the park's burnt stands of aging lodgepole pines should provide a 30-fold increase in plant species.
"We see what's going on here not as devastation and destruction, but, rather, rebirth and renewal of these ecosystems," says John Varley, Yellowstone's chief of research and Mr. Despain's boss.
The National Park Service has already been at the center of a much-publicized political firestorm over its 16-year-old "natural burn" policy, which allows lightning-caused fires to burn themselves out, except where they threaten towns or park buildings.
Mr. Despain joined the park's research department in 1971 after finishing his doctorate at the University of Alberta on the plants of the Bighorn Mountains in northern Wyoming.
Alston Chase, an author and park critic, describes Mr. Despain as one of the park's "most orthodox believers" in the official natural management policy.
True, fire boundaries within the park cover about half the park's acreage.
The burnt "snags," as charred tree trunks are called, creak in the wind above Mr. Despain and are all that remain of a forest section that sprouted after a fire swept through here about the time of the Civil War.
Mr. Despain says it is no coincidence that most burnt trees here were senior citizens, relatively speaking, and highly susceptible to fire.
"Fires have been an integral force in the Yellowstone ecosystem for the past 10,000 years since the glaciers left," Mr. Varley says.
Carol Shively, a park ranger-naturalist at Grant Village in Yellowstone, says, "Next spring is going to be a spectacular one for wildflowers."
Then the forest thins as it ages, trees fall, underbrush grows, and the forest is primed for a fire to start its life cycle over again.
