EAST DENNIS, Mass. --
It's 5:30 a.m., an icy rain is falling from an indigo sky, and there's a stiff northeaster.
This Cape Cod country road is deserted, but for the sweaty silhouette of John Kelley.
Mr. Kelley is in training for the Boston Marathon -- his 60th Boston Marathon.
And even at the age of 83, he probably will finish ahead of a large number of the 13,000 runners expected to compete -- officially or unofficially -- on April 15.
Bill Rodgers, a four-time Boston Marathon winner who plans to run again this year, marvels at Mr. Kelley: "
"Aghast is more like it," says Leslie Pawson, 86, a three-time Boston champion who ran against Mr. Kelley half a century ago.
John Adelbert Kelley is a throwback to a time when marathoners did it for glory and cab fare.
A two-time winner in Boston (1935 and 1945) and runner-up seven times, Mr. Kelley is to be the oldest competitor in the race this year -- as he has been for 15 years.
Mr. Kelley is such an institution that Hopkinton, Mass., where the race begins, has made him an honorary citizen.
Two state troopers will run alongside the 5-foot-6, 130-pound Mr. Kelley into Boston so he won't be trampled by "groupies," as he calls them, clamoring to shake his hand.
Though he isn't the oldest person ever to enter the Boston Marathon, Mr. Kelley is the oldest to run it.
Of course, Mr. Kelley -- not to be confused with the other John Kelley, who won the Boston Marathon in 1957 -- isn't the runner he was in 1935 when he won the race, in 2 hours, 32 minutes, 7 seconds.
In those days, Mr. Kelley recalls, he ran in black leather high-jumping shoes that he cut open at the toes with a razor blade.
"The winners get a medal and $55,000," says Mr. Kelley.
Physiologically, whatever that means, I got all A's," Mr. Kelley reports of his checkup four months ago.
A mechanic for Boston Edison Co. before he retired in 1972, Mr. Kelley started running in the evenings after work more than six decades ago.
Mr. Kelley well knows the jagged course from Hopkinton to downtown Boston:
