America's 1988 drought captured attention everywhere, but especially in Washington where politicians pushed through the largest disaster relief measure in U.S. history.
The Associated Press went back to track where the $3.9 billion went and found the money spread far beyond the drought.
The record $3.9 billion drought relief program of 1988, hailed as salvation for small farmers devastated by a brutal dry spell, became much more _ an unexpected, election-year windfall for thousands of farmers who collected millions of dollars for nature's normal quirks.
An Associated Press study conducted over seven months found the drought relief bill paid cash to farmers for everything from hail-damaged kiwi fruit in California to heat-stressed radicchio in Massachusetts, rain-bloated tomatoes in New Jersey and washed-out bird seed in Colorado.
Payments went far beyond the initial intent to save Midwestern grain growers from bankruptcy, an effort _ supported by almost everyone _ that simply grew and grew and grew.
By the time checks were being written at the county level, the AP found, fellow farmers elected to locally administer federal agriculture programs were approving claims for such common perils as insects, sand, wind, cold and fungus, even ``ineffective herbicide.''
By the end of this October, about one-quarter of all U.S. farmers had collected on damage to most of 506 eligible crops and just about any kind of weather peril in 49 states.
``We lucked out last year on account of the boys up north,'' said Travis Turnipseed, a Levelland, Texas, cotton farmer who's had hail damage 23 out of the last 28 years, but collected cash for the first time in 1988.
Loose regulations and lax enforcement of them were the major reasons for the government generosity, the AP found by examining federal records in 14 states through the Freedom of Information Act.
``Being an election year, there were a lot of concessions to farmers,'' said Dan Otto, a professor at Iowa State University.
In the end, drought relief became a one-time bonus for thousands of farmers in parts of the country that in 1988 generally enjoyed good crops at higher prices and wouldn't have qualified as disaster areas, including parts of California, Arizona, New Mexico, Texas, Oklahoma, Maryland and New Jersey.
``Some farmers just got grandfathered in, that's true,'' said Dan Shaw, deputy administrator of the Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service, which administers payment programs for the Agriculture Department.
