Her movies now are few and far between, but when she is ill, the world still stands at attention.
Liz Taylor's latest bout with pneumonia has drawn the kind of intense scrutiny normally accorded presidential polyps.
And today, yet again, everyone is talking about La Liz.
If she has enjoyed the most brilliant career and the glare of fame, she has also survived seven rocky marriages to six men, the frailest health and the most frightening bouts with addiction to booze, drugs and food.
For the tabloid press had been humming with rumors that Liz Taylor had AIDS virtually since she was checked into Daniel Freeman Hospital in Marina del Rey April 9 with a high fever and sinus infection.
Did the AIDS rumors start because of Taylor's ballyhooed friendship with publishing titan Malcolm Forbes, whose recent death touched off reports about his alleged homosexuality?
Or because one of her doctors, Michael Roth, was a renowned AIDS specialist -- even though Roth was supervising her treatment for drug and alcohol addiction as early as 1983?
they're living and dying with her," said Barry Levine, Hollywood bureau chief of the Star, which featured a cover photograph of Liz, hooked up to an intravenous tube and oxygen mask, being transferred from the Marina del Rey hospital to St. John's.
Some press coverage has bent over backwards to tug at the bounds of credibility; the National Enquirer has Liz communing with the ghosts of Forbes and one-time husband Richard Burton.
Behind a chorus line of video cameras -- representing the major networks, the local stations, CNN and the tabloid shows -- reporters peppered the doctors with pointed and sometimes testy questions about Taylor's treatment and drug use.
She has received her four children -- Christopher and Michael Wilding, Maria Burton-Carson and Liza Todd-Tivey -- friends Roddy McDowall and Carole Bayer Sager and Liz's younger, ex-trucker boyfriend, Larry Lee Fortensky, 38.
In fact, Taylor has been plagued by health woes ever since her 1945 film debut in "National Velvet"; her fall from a horse triggered a lifetime of back trouble.
Over the years she has endured about 20 major operations on her back, appendix, eyes and teeth; when the Asian flu threatened Taylor's life, doctors made a hole in her throat so she could breathe.
When she emerged a born-again beauty in 1985 after shedding 60 pounds, and wrote a beauty book to boot, she was applauded by many -- including comedian Joan Rivers, who had made fat-Liz jokes
Taylor, the first celebrity known to enter the Betty Ford clinic in Rancho Mirage, made a public example of her willingness to take on her addictions in two heavily publicized stays there.
