Out of the horn of Africa has emerged the most devastating and dominant group of marathon runners the world has seen.
Or at least since the last time Ethiopia ventured from its athletic isolation and won three consecutive Olympic gold medals, putting its indelible stamp on the marathon.
It appears to be happening again, a generation after Abebe Bikila ran barefoot through the darkened streets of Rome in 1960 to win the first of his two Olympic golds.
Bikila won the 1964 Olympic Marathon in Tokyo and a nation named its baby boys after its hero.
Mekonnen, a police lieutenant from Addis Ababa, made a furious rush with a mile to go, passing Juma Ikangaa of Tanzania and winning Monday's Boston Marathon in 2 hours 9 minutes 6 seconds.
Ingrid Kristiansen of Norway easily won the women's race in 2:24:33 after abandoning her attempt to break 2:20.
Still, Kristiansen finished 26th overall, believed to be the highest finish for a woman in this race.
Joan Benoit Samuelson, who set a world record on this course in 1983, was beset with physical problems that altered her stride at 11 miles, and she finished ninth among the women in 2:37:52.
It also was the first time Kristiansen had beaten Samuelson in a marathon.
Dinsamo holds the world record of 2:06:50, set last year on the same course.
Also on Sunday, in the World Cup Marathon at Milan, Ethiopians finished 1-2.
Ethiopia beat Italy for the World Cup team title with a second-string team.
Nearly a dozen Ethiopian runners have been deployed around the world in this hectic two-week period of spring marathons.
Two other Ethiopians were in Monday's Boston race, placing ninth and 18th.
And still another, Wodajo Bulti, who has run 2:08:44, is one of the favorites in the London Marathon next Sunday.
Had they not boycotted, at least three Ethiopian runners would have been among the favorites in the men's marathon at Seoul.
And they ran not as strangers, because Mekonnen had beaten Ikangaa in winning last year's Tokyo Marathon.
Samuelson, who holds the U.S. marathon record, said she will significantly decrease her training mileage and probably run shorter races.
