Two propositions on California's Nov. 6 ballot would, among other things, limit the terms of statewide officeholders and state legislators.
Proposition 131 would limit statewide elected officials to two consecutive four-year terms, state legislators to 12 consecutive years in office; Proposition 140 would hold Assembly members to six years in office, state senators and statewide elected officials to eight.
what would state government be like by 1996 and thereafter?
The Times asked six legislators and legislative specialists.
(R-Monrovia), first elected in 1978, a former general contractor who has served as mayor and city councilman of Monrovia (1968-76):
Term limits would give the people of California more control over the Legislature, and the Legislature would be less prone to special interests, because legislators would know they are going to be there for six years
I came to the Legislature after eight years on the (Monrovia) City Council.
My guess is that in about 20 years, there would be another initiative to change (term limits) because we will have found that (they) didn't work.
It would become clear rather quickly that you have a bunch of elected amateurs trying to run a very complex, complicated system of state government.
Karl T. Kurtz, director of state services, National Conference of State Legislatures:
Mark P. Petracca, assistant professor of politics and society, UC Irvine:
The national effect would be very impressive because, unlike Oklahoma (where voters recently approved a 12-year-limit on legislators), which does not have a reputation for being in the vanguard of political change in America, California does.
Because it is the largest political state in the country, a success for either proposition here is likely to have spinoff moves around the country. . . .
The Schabarum initiative (Proposition 140, backed by Los Angeles County Supervisor Pete Schabarum), with a six-year limit (for Assembly members), would have an adverse effect on the Latino community.
If there are constant changes, the impact of term limits would be to empower the bureaucracy -- the people who are not elected --
Gary C. Jacobson, fellow, Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University; professor of political science, UC San Diego:
