BETHESDA, Md. -- Eva Mitrova, a visiting researcher at the National Institutes of Health here, unrolls a map of her native Czechoslovakia and points to Poltar, a village where the strange deaths started.
One day in 1975, a 49-year-old journalist there complained to a doctor that he couldn't concentrate.
Gradually he lost coordination, sometimes jerking uncontrollably.
Under a microscope, parts of his brain, riddled with little holes, looked like a sponge.
Thus began another chapter in one of medicine's most bizarre mysteries, a tale of sick sheep and mad cows, cannibals and Pennsylvanians, ancient life forms and a cat named Max.
The plot revolves around a family of brain diseases, probably variations of a single disorder, called spongiform encephalopathy.
Spongiform research already has raised questions about a cornerstone of biology and spawned a Nobel Prize.
Recently the fascination has taken on a more anxious cast as the disease has struck humans and animals with suspicious regularity in several places, underscoring a longstanding question: Do people get the disease from animals?
The question has burned with special intensity since scrapie, the form of the disease in sheep, jumped to British cattle a few years ago after they were fed ground-up parts of infected sheep.
About 20,000 British cattle have been destroyed since 1986 in hopes of eradicating the spongiform "mad cow" disease, which makes the animals jittery before they keel over.
A few weeks ago, the first confirmed case of mad cow disease outside Britain turned up in Switzerland.
U.S. meat producers have reason to be anxious about this because the incidence of scrapie has been rising in American sheep since the mid-1980s, says Richard Marsh, a University of Wisconsin scrapie expert.
Yet sheep have never been strongly implicated in cases of the human form of the disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, or CJD.
The outbreak has become something of an epidemic around the Orava area, where 26 cases have occurred since 1987, a rate hundreds of times higher than normal for CJD.
That's a leap of folklore, though, and the sheep link may well turn out to be false, cautions Dr. Mitrova.
Indeed, CJD is a nefarious trickster; the first reported case of the disease, which entered medical texts in the 1920s, really wasn't CJD after all, scientists now believe.
Two years later, William Hadlow, a U.S. veterinarian, saw a picture of one of the kuru brains in a medical journal and was struck by its spongy appearance.
Brain tissue of infected animals could transmit the disease when injected into different animals' brains, yet microscopes revealed no signs of infectious microbes.
The cluster of more than a dozen CJD cases "isn't an epidemic" and appears to have topped out in 1989, says Brian Little, an Allentown neuropathologist leading a study of it.
