IN BLOOD-RED letters, the sign on the front window of the Dealers Outlet gun store in suburban Phoenix declared: "
Stop the Gun Ban!"
Inside, customers took time out from browsing through AK-47 assault rifles and a flock of other firearms to sign a petition -- and to vent their wrath at a local "turncoat," U.S. Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D-Ariz.).
"We are petitioning to protest the semiautomatic gun-control bills before Congress," read the text above a fast-growing list of names.
"If we allow the government to become involved in any type of gun control, we are violating a basic constitutional right, the right to keep and bear arms."
last spring was DeConcini, a longtime opponent of gun-control measures who had suddenly switched sides, sponsoring one of the nine bills currently in Congress to ban the sale of assault weapons.
"I'm a one-issue voter, and I'm going to do everything in my power to take DeConcini out," George Hiers, a burly man on crutches, vowed as he bought a semiautomatic shotgun for his wife to defend herself with while he's away on hunting trips.
The attack on DeConcini was stirred up by the National Rifle Assn.
Long described as "the powerful gun lobby," the NRA is now scrambling to recover from stunning setbacks in the past three years.
Over the NRA's opposition, Congress and state legislatures have enacted legislation banning "cop-killer bullets" that penetrate protective vests, plastic guns that can be slipped past metal detectors and "Saturday night specials" that are used in many crimes.
And most recently, the group found itself caught in the furor over assault weapons that was ignited by the massacre of five children in a Stockton schoolyard last January.
Those killings, combined with the increasing use of the weapons by drug dealers and youth gangs, have exacerbated the contentious relations between the NRA and its former allies.
Law-enforcement leaders, concerned about rising violence and terrorism, have ended their friendliness toward the gun lobby and become well-organized in opposition.
Politicians once fearful of the NRA have been much more willing to stand up to it; President Bush, an NRA "Life Member," on July 7 imposed a permanent ban on imports of assault rifles and has proposed limiting the semiautomatics' ammunition clips.
The ban so infuriated some NRA members that they have launched petition drives in two dozen states to oust Bush from the organization.
Meanwhile, California, whose voters only seven years ago defeated an initiative that would have frozen the number of handguns in the state, last May became the first state to ban assault weapons.
And the NRA even is feeling pressure from more-militant gun groups that threaten to drain away members and funds.
Thus, in fending off the assaults on assault weapons, the 118-year-old NRA is facing what its leaders call its most daunting challenge.
"We're going to go down the road of either prohibitive firearms regulations or tough criminal justice provisions" --
But with opinion polls in both states showing that large majorities of residents support bans -- and with police complaining about being outgunned by criminals -- legislators have moved into action, spurring angry counterattacks from the NRA.
AS PAT JONAS signed the petition in the gun store near Phoenix, one could witness the NRA's true political power: mobilizing citizens at the grass roots.
Probably no other organization in the world floods government officials with as many phone calls, letters, telegrams and visits from its members as the NRA.
Time and again, the NRA has proved that citizen action generated by such mailings can have far more effect on legislation than opinion polls, especially when a majority for gun control is relatively silent.
"If a lawmaker is looking for an excuse to vote with the NRA, all he has to say is, 'I got a hundred calls from the NRA, but none from the other side,' " said a congressional aide.
It was one of these red-alert warnings, written by NRA lobbyist Baker, that had been delivered to 100,000 gun owners in Arizona and riled up the customers at the Dealers Outlet outside Phoenix.
May. DeConcini's bill calls for a nationwide ban on sales of AK-47s and eight other semiautomatic rifles --
guns enjoying wide popularity because they have the menacing look and much of the firepower of fully automatic assault weapons used by the military and police.
In three weeks, DeConcini's office received 6,395 calls and letters against his bill and 68 for it, despite a poll indicating that more than two-thirds of the people in metropolitan Phoenix favor some kind of ban on assault weapons.
"I've been to the four corners of Arizona, and people are shocked and dismayed" by DeConcini's bill, said Landis Aden, a motorcycle-riding computer technician who lobbies part time for the Arizona NRA.
Aden believes that semiautomatic guns would come in handy if a Mexican revolution spilled over the border and Arizonans got caught in the cross fire.
But DeConcini was also careful to take political cover behind two Republicans who are NRA "Life Members."
(Goldwater made the remark shortly after appearing in a full-page, "I'm the NRA" ad in Time magazine.)
DeConcini, an NRA "Person of the Month" last year, said that NRA officials "flat told me, 'We can't negotiate' " on his bill because "they were burned so badly last year when they negotiated with (then-Atty.
Her gray slacks, blue ruffled blouse and blue suede jacket complemented her steel-blue eyes but belied her credentials: prize-winning marksman and hardball lobbyist for the Florida NRA.
Finally, as NRA Washington lobbyist Baker had done in his letter to Arizona gun owners, Hammer charged that a loosely worded definition in the Florida bill would inadvertently ban all semiautomatic rifles and shotguns.
"They called me Judas" because he had backed a Senate leadership team viewed by the NRA as sympathetic to controls on handguns and assault weapons.
Inside the eight-story building, many of the 365 employees worked on gun-safety courses, shooting competitions, police firearms training and other services that predominated at the NRA until heavy lobbying against gun control began in the 1970s.
In his seventh-floor office, Jim Baker -- one of five in-house lobbyists supplemented by four high-powered outsiders -- had put the finishing touches on his letter to Arizona gun owners, slamming DeConcini's bill.
Cassidy said a number of concerned NRA members wrote him, asking, "What are you going to do about this?"
An NRA operative conceded that, despite a tough "no-compromise" resolution unanimously adopted at the national convention, the NRA might have to back a compromise bill when Congress takes final action on assault weapons.
Addressing the meeting, NRA President Foss acknowledged that the beleaguered group could, indeed, use more help.
