Remarkably, as many as 166 persons survived the violent crash, according to Richard Vohs, a spokesman for Iowa Gov. Terry E. Branstad.
As rescuers worked underneath floodlights to remove bodies from the crash site, original estimates of the death toll -- one as high as 190, which would have made the crash the second worst in U.S. history -- were reduced.
"We don't have a firm count" of the dead, Vohs acknowledged at a press conference seven hours after the crash. "But right now, the number (of survivors) confirmed is 166."
"I walked out (through the back of the plane) and found myself in the cornfield," passenger David Landsberger told Cable News Network.
One hundred ambulances, fire trucks and helicopters from as far away as South Dakota plucked out the victims.
United Airlines declined to comment on the number of survivors or to release the names of the 282 passengers and 11 crew members.
Eyewitnesses said pieces of the 15-year-old airplane -- one of the oldest airliners in United's fleet -- were falling off as far as 75 miles from the site of the crash.
They said it would be about 30 seconds, but it was about five minutes," another passenger said.
Haynes brought the plane into the airport's 9,000-foot-long southwest runway, surrounded by corn, soybeans and pasture with some trees seven miles outside downtown Sioux City.
I think it landed upside down," said passenger Melanie Cincala of Toledo, Ohio, who said the plane burst into flames after she got off.
He said rescuers pulled out three of the flight crew alive.
He said the huge mass of the DC-10 must have helped the pilot slow the plane as it approached the ground and helped keep portions of it intact.
United, the nation's second largest airline, has one of the oldest fleets in the industry.
All 258 passengers and 13 crew members died, as well as two people on the ground.
The NTSB also criticized McDonnell Douglas' design as vulnerable to maintenance damage.
The cause of that accident, which took place over the Pacific near Hawaii, is under investigation.
The airline told NTSB investigators that it had "somehow overlooked" an FAA recommendation to inspect the cargo door latch locks each time the door is closed manually, rather than electrically.
None of the airliner's 108 passengers were injured.
The second-worst crash in U.S. history was an Aug. 16, 1987, crash that killed 156 people when a Northwest Airlines jet crashed on takeoff at Detroit Metropolitan Airport.
