The 80,000 men and women who battle the nation's wildfires have always known their lives were endangered by flames or heat or falling debris.
But now, two new studies show they also face an unseen hazard: Their health is under siege from the poisonous stew of gases and soot in wildfire smoke.
Among the culprits are carbon monoxide, which slows reaction and impairs judgment; microscopic particles of carbon that lodge in the lungs; aldehydes and acids that irritate air passages, and hydrocarbon-based substances and other chemicals that can damage genes and cause cancer, tests show.
Combined, the researchers tested the lungs of more than 100 California wildland firefighters before and after the 1988 and 1989 fire seasons.
Health experts also suspect that exposure to wildfire smoke may accelerate aging, prompt fatal heart attacks or cancer and trigger respiratory diseases such as chronic bronchitis or asthma.
But our studies show their lungs aren't back to normal," said Dr. Robert Harrison, the California health department's chief of occupational health surveillance and the physician in charge of one of the studies.
"For some of the firefighters, the drop in lung function was rather striking."
The worst doses of carbon monoxide and other hazardous chemicals, which can be fatal, are given off when fires smolder, the stage in which firefighters spend most of their time, said Darold Ward, a U.S. Forest Service chemist.
Mark Linane, who heads a national firefighting crew known as the Hotshots, said he has seen wildland firefighters so poisoned by carbon monoxide that they can't decide which shoe to tie.
The hazards are particularly acute in Southern California, which is prone to more large, smoky fires than anywhere else in the nation.
For nearly 10 years, urban firefighters have known that toxic smoke from burning structures and cars greatly increases their chances of cancer and heart disease.
Furthermore, developing protection for the crews has gotten little attention and virtually no state or federal funding.
But because no mortality studies have been funded, all they have is the old joke heard around the fire camp:
For many firefighters, the lung congestion turns into bronchitis or walking pneumonia three times a year, said Linane, 46, who has fought wildfires for 28 years.
Stan Stewart, 37, said he knew when he joined the Forest Service at 17 that the job was dangerous.
But I've never smoked," said Stewart, foreman of the Hotshot crew in Los Padres National Forest near Ojai.
"I don't want to wait for firefighters to die," said Jack Wiest, the department's chief of fire planning and research.
But William Sommers, director of forest fire research for the National Wildfire Coordinating Group, said national funds are scarce.
In what was called the "Siege of '87," 1,500 fires attacked the Klamath National Forest near the California-Oregon border in one month.
The firefighters' union, concerned that crews were falling ill in record numbers, asked Johns Hopkins University to send a doctor.
Immediately after the 1987 fires, Ford and other researchers from Johns Hopkins and the California health department mounted studies.
Fire crews at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory wear 1-pound air purifiers.
Sources: USDA Forest Service Intermountain Research Station, California Department of Health Services and Johns Hopkins University School of Hygiene and Public Health,
