It was a scene that recalled the golden days for Ben Johnson.
The media were there, as before, chronicling a news conference.
Johnson was as before, shy and yet brimming with confidence.
There was the bluster, the bragging, the promise of big things to come.
This scene, which played out two weeks ago in Italy, was familiar, with one exception.
Johnson was also suspended from competition for two years; that suspension ends today.
And so the questions begin: What can Johnson do when not assisted by performance-enhancing drugs?
You hear grumblings among media types and in some circles of the sport, but you have to give the guy the benefit of the doubt.
With the humility and shame that has been reflected on him, people tend to be more open minded about it.
They hope the guy comes back clean and fast."
It is this apparent contradiction that Ben Johnson must overcome in his comeback.
Charlie Francis, who coached Johnson for 12 years, estimated that steroids made Johnson faster by one meter.
"I want to take back the titles and the records I have been deprived of," the Associated Press quoted Johnson as saying.
Promoters of indoor meets this season doubt that Johnson will regain his records, but they hope that fans will turn out in huge numbers to watch him try.
Ben sort of transcends the sport, and, God knows, we need someone to transcend the sport."
"I'd like to have Ben Johnson regardless of how he runs.
Howard Schmertz of the Millrose Games in New York has an interest in Johnson, but perhaps not the budget.
"There has been damage to the sport and people want to blame Ben personally for that damage," Gaines said.
Franken said he had meetings with his sponsor, Sunkist, to discuss the possible image problem.
I don't know how the public is going to react.
One thing that may not happen is a much-discussed lucrative match race between Johnson and Lewis.
Futerman limits Johnson's contact with the media, saying "Ben has said all he has to say.
The action gave the IAAF power to erase all of Johnson's results between June 12, 1983, and June 12, 1989.
The rule stripped Johnson of his world record of 9.83 in the 100 meters and 6.41 in the indoor 60 meters.
