Steep hillsides covered with trees and dense brush.
The conditions are familiar to South Bay firefighters, who know they may be no more than a careless match away from a blaze as intense and unpredictable as the one that devastated the Oakland hills last Sunday.
Now, in the wake of that firestorm, local firefighters are looking up at the hills that surround this area and wondering not whether, but only when and where.
"I know it's there," said Saratoga Fire Chief Ernest Kraule.
The danger is in the Saratoga foothills, where Kraule's department has battled nine deliberately set fires since June -- most recently Oct. 19, the same day Oakland firefighters thought they had contained a brush fire that a day later blossomed into the deadly firestorm.
It's in the mountain communities that straddle Highway 9 in Santa Cruz County, isolated by weak bridges that won't support some firetrucks and connected by a two-lane road that will hinder escape.
In fact, the danger of an Oakland-like inferno is in almost all of the hills that ring the South Bay, where homes often are surrounded by dense brush or stately trees, the fuel of rapidly spreading wildfires.
"The tendency is to have bigger fires that are much more expensive to put out, with much more property loss," said Roy Pike, a deputy chief in the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection's Santa Rosa office.
"On a good day, trying to maneuver fire apparatus on those roads is tough," said Steve Cavallero, a battalion chief for the Redwood City Fire Department, which covers a portion of Emerald Lake Hills.
An estimated 25,000 people live in the communities along Highway 9 between Santa Cruz and Boulder Creek, the curvy, two-lane road that would be the only way out in the case of a major fire.
Ed Ekers, chief of the Santa Cruz city fire department, worries about sending his trucks through "a tunnel of fire" if flames were ever to spread across the canopy of trees above Highway 9.
"We would face the same situation," said Sharon Whaley, spokeswoman for the San Jose Water Co., which serves foothill areas in Los Gatos, Saratoga and Almaden.
