The Northwest Airlines jet that crashed Sunday in Detroit, killing at least 154 people, was involved in two incidents of engine failure in the past two years.
According to Federal Aviation Administration records, the McDonnell Douglas Corp. MD-82 jet made emergency landings in 1985 and 1986 following the loss of power in one of its two engines.
A Northwest spokesman confirmed that the incidents happened, but said they weren't related to Sunday's crash of Flight 255.
Though federal investigators were looking into a number of possible causes for the crash, which occurred shortly after takeoff, engine failure appeared to be a likely culprit.
The accident, the second-deadliest ever in the U.S., could have a broad range of effects on the airline industry regardless of the specific causes, aviation specialists said.
Following a summer of near-misses, delays and other snafus, some airline specialists said the accident could serve as a catalyst for a reassessment of the nation's air-travel system.
Unlike the recent near-misses, the Detroit accident doesn't appear related to air-traffic control problems.
"There is going to be a lot of noise from Capitol Hill," said John Galipault, president of the Aviation Safety Institute.
The MD-82 jet, which has a good safety record, is designed to be able to take off and land even if one engine fails.
The extras included six crew members, two babies who were being held by passengers and two Northwest employees riding on two of the plane's jump seats.
In April, the National Transportation Safety Board urged the FAA to conduct a safety investigation of the 200 series of JT8D engines after some dangerous in-flight engine failures.
The board made the recommendation after a March 23 incident in which an American Airlines MD-82 plane approaching the Minneapolis airport experienced an engine surge and loss of power.
In others, airlines have made changes, based on a Pratt &amp; Whitney service bulletin, to reduce the risk of pin failure.
Thomas Haueter, of the safety recommendations staff of the safety agency, said that the board hadn't put out an emergency recommendation for immediate replacement of the pins because it was unclear if the problems that had occurred were merely isolated incidents or reflected system problems.
A Northwest spokesman said the engines involved in those two incidents had since been replaced by other JT8D-200 series engines.
FAA records show that besides those incidents that involved the plane that crashed, problems with the turbine sections of JT8D-200 series engines occurred on three Republic flights in the past four years.
