How can 6,000 civil servants, mostly based in Washington, best promote development in the Third World?
That is the vexing question facing Mr Lewis Preston, the former chairman of J P Morgan, the New York bank, who takes over as president of the World Bank this September.
As bankers and finance ministers gathered in Washington this weekend for the spring meetings of the bank and International Monetary Fund, there was no shortage of advice.
The US Treasury wants the bank to bypass the governments of developing countries and lend sizeable sums directly to the private sector.
The bank is also under pressure to follow the example of Mr Jacques Attali's European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and attach strict political conditions to its loans.
Development economists, meanwhile, are urging the bank to respect the rhetoric of last year's World Development Report and focus more on poverty alleviation.
Mr Preston may relax on one count.
Few in Washington now doubt that the bank is needed: new imperatives, such as reconstruction in eastern Europe and the Middle East, have merely been superimposed on older, unsolved problems:
Grinding poverty is a near universal condition in much of the world: 1bn people live on less than Dollars 1 a day.
In Mexico, life expectancy for the poorest 10 per cent is 20 years less than for the richest 10 per cent.
What kind of bank will Mr Preston inherit from his predecessor, Mr Barber Conable?
It is not an impressive bureaucracy,' says Mr John Williamson, a senior fellow at the Institute for International Economics. '
The morale of staff is lousy,' says Mr Charles Flickner, a senior analyst on the Senate Budget Committee and close observer of the bank.
Mr Percy Mistry, a scholar at Queen Elizabeth House, Oxford, and former senior adviser at the bank, says it suffered from 'presidential failure' during the 1980s.
But neither Mr Conable nor his predecessor, Mr A W 'Tom' Clausen, a commercial banker, could fill his shoes.
Many Third World countries have gone backwards.
The Brady plan is enough,' says Mr Williamson, if developing countries are willing to embrace reform and if it is matched by greater forgiveness of official debt.
Officials such as Mr David Mulford of the US Treasury say the recent forgiveness of about half of Poland's official debt will not set a precedent for other debtors.
The bank failed to take a timely leadership position on the debt crisis,' concludes Mr Richard Feinberg, director of the Overseas Development Council in Washington.
