IT IS ironic that there is an unprecedented, greedy rush for diamonds by miners in Angola and Canada precisely at a time when the diamond business is in turmoil and questions are inevitably being asked about the ability of the world's most successful cartel to keep its tight grip on the market.
In Canada's Northwest Territories, the discovery of 81 small diamonds, some of gem quality, has sparked the biggest rush to stake mining claims in the history of the North American industry.
In spite of all this hectic activity, it is very unlikely that anyone will find enough big diamonds to make the development of Canada's first diamond mine worthwhile.
The odds in favour of making a fortune are much better for the diamond hunters in Angola.
This rise of illegal mining, particularly in the Cuango region, which produces 80 per cent of Angola's diamonds and some of its highest-quality gem stones, started in May, 1991, after the peace accord which allowed freedom of movement for the first time in 16 years.
The onset of the dry season and the fall in river levels from the end of May this year has encouraged what De Beers, the South African group that dominates the world diamond business, describes as 'a sudden and unprecedented explosion in the supply of illicit Angolan diamonds reaching the market'.
What is also remarkable is that all those scrambling for diamonds in Angola or dropping out of the skies to stake expensive claims in Canada take it for granted that the diamond cartel will be able to continue to keep prices up and make all their efforts worthwhile.
Apart from De Beers' own production from Namibia and South Africa, the CSO handles rough gem diamonds from Angola, Australia, Botswana, Russia, Tanzania and Zaire.
The CSO has been mopping up as many of the smuggled Angolan diamonds as possible to stop havoc being created in a business already suffering severely from soggy demand in the US and Japan, the two biggest markets, which share about two-thirds of demand between them.
It has also told the producers to cut deliveries by 25 per cent - something the CSO contracts permit at times of stress.
Mr Harry Oppenheimer, whose family effectively controls both De Beers and its sister group, the Anglo American Corporation of South Africa, was defending the cartel again last week at the formal opening of the R1.1bn Venetia diamond mine in the Transvaal. '
De Beers has taken good care that merchant stocks have never again been built for speculative reasons, frequently going to the banks, the potential financiers of stockpiling operations, to 'educate' them about the way the diamond market works.
