Fire long ago destroyed the house where Clarence Thomas spent his boyhood.
But nearby, down a woodsy, one-lane, white-sand road outside Savannah, Ga., sits a reminder of what might have been -- the tired cottage where his sister still lives, by a broad, shining marsh called Moon River.
Down shore sits the defunct packing factory where his family and most of the rest of the people in the semirural cluster of houses and trailer-homes known as Pin Point used to pick the meat from crabs and chop the heads off shrimp.
There, in the segregated black Georgia of four decades past, began the toughening of Clarence Thomas, nominee to the United States Supreme Court.
Instead, Thomas, now 43, became something else -- a hybrid product of harsh Southern history and baby-boom ambition, a proponent of personal strength over dependence, of individualism over government activism.
By the time he arrived in Washington with the Reagan administration, he had developed into a rare breed -- a black conservative so impressive to Republican presidents that he was set on the road to the highest court in the land.
Historically, trying to predict Supreme Court nominees has been extremely risky.
Still, many liberals are convinced that Thomas' past clearly shows his future.
Not surprisingly, Thomas' many friends and supporters draw different conclusions.
There, just the other day, Leola Williams, Thomas' mother, talked about how the force of family worked on her son:
"I guess Clarence wanted to prove to himself he could be what he wanted to be -- and prove to his grandfather he could be the kind of person (his grandfather) wanted him to be."
Clarence went to live with his grandparents in Savannah, to help with Anderson's year-round oil and ice delivery business.
His grandfather proved to be a profound force in Thomas' life -- a mentor, a role model, an unrelenting taskmaster and the embodiment of a personal philosophy that Thomas once recalled this way:
Thomas, who had experienced racial mistreatment by white seminarians in Georgia, ultimately rejected seminary life.
He graduated from Holy Cross with honors and left for Yale University Law School in New Haven, Conn.
But it was Thomas Sowell, the conservative black economist now at Stanford University's Hoover Institution, whose work came to grip Thomas' mind.
When Danforth became a U.S. senator in 1977, Thomas stayed in St. Louis to work as an assistant counsel for the Monsanto Corp., then in 1979 joined Danforth in Washington as a legislative aide.
President Bush has chosen Judge Clarence Thomas of the U.S. Court of Appeals to replace Justice Thurgood Marshall, who is retiring from the Supreme Court.
