LOS ANGELES -- A much-awaited report that paints a distressing picture of brutality and racism in the Los Angeles Police Department, and that calls for the resignation of its chief, could prompt changes in law enforcement nationwide.
The report was issued yesterday by a commission appointed by Mayor Tom Bradley and Police Chief Daryl Gates in the wake of the videotaped beating March 3 of a black motorist, Rodney King, by Los Angeles police.
The commission, headed by former Deputy Secretary of State Warren Christopher, found that a significant number of officers use excessive force against Los Angeles residents, a problem exacerbated by racism and bias in the department.
While the commission stopped short of blaming Chief Gates for these problems, it said that no chief should serve more than two consecutive five-year terms, and that Mr. Gates, having served 13 years, should therefore turn in his badge following a transition period.
Nearly one-quarter of 650 officers responding to a commission survey agreed that "racial bias on the part of officers toward minority citizens currently exists and contributes to a negative interaction between police and community," and in some cases "may lead to the use of excessive force," the report said.
A scant eight hours is devoted to cultural awareness training at the Los Angeles Police Academy, and many officers who train new recruits in the field openly perpetuate the "siege mentality that alienates patrol officers from the community," the commission concluded.
Officers commonly typed racial epithets to one another on their patrol car computer systems, such as: "Sounds like monkey slapping time" and "I almost got me a Mexican last night."
The Los Angeles Police Department has long been emulated by others around the country because of its reputation for being efficient and corruption-free.
"This report will be a must-read for police chiefs around the country," said Hubert Williams, executive director of the Police Foundation, a Washington, D.C., law enforcement research group.
they are not unique to Los Angeles," said John A. Arguelles, vice chairman of the 10-member Independent Commission on the Los Angeles Police Department.
